Cardiff Carnival 25th anniversary project.
Interviewer, Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee, Cammie Nevins.
The location of the interview is the Swicker office,
and today's date is the 12th of October 2015.
For the record, Cammie, would you be kind enough to spell your name in four?
I don't mind. It's K-E-M-I, Nevins, N-E-V-I-N-S.
Cammie, tell us when and how did you first become involved in the Cardiff Carnival?
I think it was about 2003, and my friend in mind, Mary Ann, who was involved in it,
just pop along. Contains a community centre. It's good fun. There's loads of people there.
You can bring the kids. They can do some activities. So I thought, oh, great. I was working
then. I was still nursing and I was working nights. So I went along, and next thing I know,
we're in the full throes of making costumes, of practising dance routines. It was absolutely
wild, but it was memorable. I loved it. And I must confess, it was actually back in 1993,
not 2003. Oh, sorry, 1993. I was in a dementia setting.
And I remember that you were certainly one of the lead. It was a group of angels, wasn't it?
Yeah. Yeah. We had all white costumes with white wings, which we made out of, I think it might have
been some sort of bamboo-y, bendy wood. And we had to thread metres and metres and metres of white
material through them. They were quite big and quite high. And then a full white costume as well.
And it had to be made so that you could securely sort of strap to your body.
Got it. Got it. And of course, your choreographer, your dance tutor, your,
what can I say, your inspiration was Mary Ann Roberts. Yeah. Originally from Trinidad and
residence in Cardiff. And if I remember correctly, there was a climactic battle between your
virginal white angelic group and a group of, what can I say, water pistol, well,
they were pump action shotgun type water pistols. Hooligans. Hooligans. They were devils.
Yeah. So we were the angels. Yeah. So what exactly happened to you on the steps of the
National Museum? Well, we were there and we'd done the dance routine, which was really cool.
And there's all of us, there's kids there, there's adults there, the whole sort of generational
thing going on. And then we were squirted with this red blood. You all died, didn't you? Yeah,
we did. That was the end of us really. But it was a brilliant way to go in a brilliant location.
Not quite the end of the story because despite the fact that we had practised to make sure that
the red dye, that the devils were pumping all over your beautiful white costumes. Yeah.
In fact, didn't dye the steps of the iconic National Museum of Wales. I mean,
when I got permission from the director to use the space for our finale, I signed on behalf of
SWCCA a very big legal document, an indemnity document in which the company undertook to return
the fabric of the building intact and unaltered in any way. And that night, you know, 1993,
night mass, the performance was in the evening. Obviously, we had lights and we had pyro as well.
Some naked flame before health and safety was invented and the rest of it. But unbeknownst to
me, in some enthusiastic devil, rather than going with the approved and tested weak strength red dye,
had taken it upon themselves to add volumes of more food colouring and dye to the blood type
stuff that was in the water pistols and the water guns. And so the next morning after the carnival,
I received a phone call from the director of the National Museum of Wales, who asked me to come and
meet him urgently on the steps of the National Museum of Wales in Cattays. Naturally, I scooted
over there and as I approached the steps in sunlight, I could see they appear to be dappled
with something. And then to my utter horror, I discovered that, yeah, the carnival had in fact
dyed a goodly proportion of the steps of the National Museum bright red, which of course was
a disaster. I mean, the idea that you can't imagine that. Yeah, the look on my face. Well,
to cut a long story short, the director of the museum, who was fully aware that we were a small
scale community funded organisation, decided to wait three months to see whether or not
the rain and wind and natural weathering would in fact take away these marks. I used to pop
along once a week and sort of spit them before, try and rub them with my feet. It was rather pathetic.
But three months in and good news for everyone. Otherwise, I'm afraid the carnival would have
died an ignomal die based death way back then. I hasten to add that the marks had
virtually gone and the director very kindly said that he would accept that I'd returned the steps
largely as they were. And we shook hands and kind of carnival went on to even more wonderful things.
Absolutely. It's always nice to put things in context. At the point in which you were describing
being in the carnival in 1993, you were a nurse in the Royal Great Hospital. Yeah, I was doing
agency night shift. So you're working at night? With my costume in tow, my accessory and to the
great delight or sort of wonderment of the rest of the staff I was on with, I'd produce this in my
break and start sewing and sticking on sequins and weaving material. And I'd actually ask people
they'd like to get involved as well. I thought, well, no point in just sitting there, you know,
with your coffee. We've done all our bits and you know, you have odd bits of time free in between
the observations and settling patients. So I had people helping me really picking up needles,
the glue gun. So we got it all done. It was brilliant. That was a fabulous, I have to say,
brilliant, brilliant job. I mean, I can still see you there in my mind. Of course, you moved on from
nursing and now I certainly would like those in the future to know. So Chemie's, the rest of us,
the queen of all things vegetarian. It's like a food carnival really, the cafe. We try to encourage
people to try different things. We like experimenting as cooks and it is like a carnival,
different colors, different textures. It's like stuff from around the world. And it's just good
fun. I enjoy it as much as I do dancing in the streets, dancing in the kitchen. Chemie,
thank you very much for that and bring this back to one of the earliest carnivals.
I hereby declare you a carnival hero. Thank you very much. Thanks, Steve.